README.md, before:

# Azure Storage Cost Analyzer

CLI tooling to discover and quantify wasted Azure storage spend (unattached disks and snapshots), with optional Zabbix metrics and Azure DevOps pipeline automation.

## Key Features
- Multi-subscription scanning with aggregated JSON/Zabbix/Text output.
- Batch cost queries via Azure Cost Management REST API for speed and reliability.
- Tag-based exclusion (`Resource-Next-Review-Date`) to defer approved resources until a review date.
- Resource Group exclusion with age-based anomaly detection (e.g., exclude ephemeral Databricks resources, but alert on old orphaned ones).
- Zabbix sender integration (metrics and LLD) and ready-to-run Azure Pipelines YAML.
- Configurable via INI (`azure-storage-cost-analyzer.conf.example`) or CLI flags.

## Quick Usage
```bash
# One-time: make executable
chmod +x azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh

# List disks (no costs)
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh list-disks "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"

# Unused resources (disks + snapshots) last 30 days
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>" \
  --days 30 \
  --output-format json

# Multi-subscription scan with Zabbix send
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --output-format json \
  --zabbix-send \
  --zabbix-server monitoring.example.com \
  --zabbix-host azure-storage-cost-analyzer

# With exclusions (exclude tagged resources + specific RGs)
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --skip-tagged \
  --exclude-rgs "databricks-rg,temp-rg"
```

### Key CLI Flags
| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--subscriptions <id\|all>` | Single subscription ID or `all` for multi-subscription |
| `--days N` | Analyze last N days (alternative: `--last-month`) |
| `--skip-tagged` | Exclude resources with future `Resource-Next-Review-Date` tags |
| `--exclude-rgs "rg1,rg2"` | Exclude resource groups (resources <60 days old) |
| `--exclude-rg-age-threshold-days N` | Override default 60-day threshold |
| `--validate-costs` | Enable Cost Management permission check (disabled by default) |
| `--sort-by-date` | Sort output by creation date instead of size |
| `--output-format <json\|text>` | Output format (default: text) |

## Prerequisites
- Azure CLI authenticated (`az login`)
- `jq`, `bc`, `timeout`/`gtimeout`
- Optional: `zabbix_sender` for metrics
- Permissions per subscription: at least `Reader` + `Cost Management Reader` (the script validates before running)
- **Platform:** Works on Linux and macOS (bash 3.2+ compatible)

## Configuration
Copy `azure-storage-cost-analyzer.conf.example` and adjust sections `[azure]`, `[output]`, `[zabbix]`, `[thresholds]`, `[advanced]`, `[exclusions]`. CLI flags override config values.

## Tests
Static sanity tests live in the `tests/` directory:
- `tests/test-phase1-features.sh`
- `tests/test-phase2-zabbix.sh`
- `tests/test-phase3-multi-subscription.sh`

They run in CI via `.github/workflows/lint.yml`. Add cloud-backed tests separately when credentials are available.

## Pipeline
`.pipelines/azure-pipelines-storage-cost-analyzer.yml` runs the analyzer daily on Azure DevOps agents and fails the build if the script fails. Update the service connection name and Zabbix variables before enabling.

Commit message:

docs: clarify self-hosted agent pool requirements
- Add comment to pipeline YAML about self-hosted pool
- Update README with agent pool requirements and hosted alternative

README.md, after:

# Azure Storage Cost Analyzer

CLI tooling to discover and quantify wasted Azure storage spend (unattached disks and snapshots), with optional Zabbix metrics and Azure DevOps pipeline automation.

## Key Features
- Multi-subscription scanning with aggregated JSON/Zabbix/Text output.
- Batch cost queries via Azure Cost Management REST API for speed and reliability.
- Tag-based exclusion (`Resource-Next-Review-Date`) to defer approved resources until a review date.
- Resource Group exclusion with age-based anomaly detection (e.g., exclude ephemeral Databricks resources, but alert on old orphaned ones).
- Zabbix sender integration (metrics and LLD) and ready-to-run Azure Pipelines YAML.
- Configurable via INI (`azure-storage-cost-analyzer.conf.example`) or CLI flags.

## Quick Usage
```bash
# One-time: make executable
chmod +x azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh

# List disks (no costs)
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh list-disks "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"

# Unused resources (disks + snapshots) last 30 days
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>" \
  --days 30 \
  --output-format json

# Multi-subscription scan with Zabbix send
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --output-format json \
  --zabbix-send \
  --zabbix-server monitoring.example.com \
  --zabbix-host azure-storage-cost-analyzer

# With exclusions (exclude tagged resources + specific RGs)
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --skip-tagged \
  --exclude-rgs "databricks-rg,temp-rg"
```

### Key CLI Flags
| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--subscriptions <id\|all>` | Single subscription ID or `all` for multi-subscription |
| `--days N` | Analyze last N days (alternative: `--last-month`) |
| `--skip-tagged` | Exclude resources with future `Resource-Next-Review-Date` tags |
| `--exclude-rgs "rg1,rg2"` | Exclude resource groups (resources <60 days old) |
| `--exclude-rg-age-threshold-days N` | Override default 60-day threshold |
| `--validate-costs` | Enable Cost Management permission check (disabled by default) |
| `--sort-by-date` | Sort output by creation date instead of size |
| `--output-format <json\|text>` | Output format (default: text) |

## Prerequisites
- Azure CLI authenticated (`az login`)
- `jq`, `bc`, `timeout`/`gtimeout`
- Optional: `zabbix_sender` for metrics
- Permissions per subscription: at least `Reader` + `Cost Management Reader` (the script validates before running)
- **Platform:** Works on Linux and macOS (bash 3.2+ compatible)

## Configuration
Copy `azure-storage-cost-analyzer.conf.example` and adjust sections `[azure]`, `[output]`, `[zabbix]`, `[thresholds]`, `[advanced]`, `[exclusions]`. CLI flags override config values.

## Tests
Static sanity tests live in the `tests/` directory:
- `tests/test-phase1-features.sh`
- `tests/test-phase2-zabbix.sh`
- `tests/test-phase3-multi-subscription.sh`

They run in CI via `.github/workflows/lint.yml`. Add cloud-backed tests separately when credentials are available.

## Pipeline
`.pipelines/azure-pipelines-storage-cost-analyzer.yml` targets a **self-hosted Linux agent pool** (see `pool.name`). To run it successfully:
- Point `pool.name` to your self-hosted pool that meets the `Agent.OS -equals Linux` demand and has outbound access to your Zabbix server.
- Ensure the agent can `sudo apt-get install zabbix-sender jq bc coreutils` (or preinstall those tools).
- Set the Azure service connection name and Zabbix variables (`ZABBIX_SERVER`, `ZABBIX_HOST`, `SCAN_DAYS`).
- Prefer hosted agents? Replace the entire `pool` block with `vmImage: 'ubuntu-latest'` before queuing.
