docs/QuickStartGuide.md, before:

# Quick Start Guide - Azure Storage Cost Analyzer

## Fast Commands

### 1) Unattached Disks Only (fast)
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unattached-disks-only \
  --subscriptions "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>" \
  --days 30
```
Runs in ~20-30 seconds; skips snapshots for speed.

### 2) Full Unused Report (disks + snapshots)
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>" \
  --days 30
```
Use when snapshot counts are reasonable (<50); large snapshot sets will take longer.

### 3) Lists Only (no cost analysis)
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh list-disks "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh list-snapshots "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"
```

## Multi-Subscription Example
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --output-format json
```

## With Exclusions
```bash
# Exclude resources with future review dates AND specific resource groups
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --skip-tagged \
  --exclude-rgs "databricks-rg,temp-rg,velero-backup-rg"
```

Resources in excluded RGs younger than 60 days are excluded from alerts.
Resources older than 60 days are included as potential anomalies.

## Skip Cost Management Validation
```bash
# Useful when Cost Management permissions vary across subscriptions
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --skip-cost-validation
```

## Notes
- Replace `<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>` with your target subscription or use `all` for all accessible subscriptions.
- For Zabbix sending, add `--zabbix-send --zabbix-server <host> --zabbix-host azure-storage-monitor`.
- Tag-based exclusion: set `Resource-Next-Review-Date=YYYY.MM.DD` on a disk/snapshot to suppress alerts until that date (use `--skip-tagged` flag).
- RG exclusion: use `--exclude-rgs "rg1,rg2"` to exclude ephemeral resource groups (default 60-day age threshold).
- Works on both Linux and macOS (bash 3.2+ compatible).

Commit message:

feat: skip Cost Management validation by default
Changed default behavior to skip Cost Management permission check.
This is useful for environments where Cost Management permissions
vary across subscriptions or are managed at EA level.

- --skip-cost-validation is now default (kept for backwards compat)
- Added --validate-costs to enable validation when needed

Updated README.md and QuickStartGuide.md accordingly.

docs/QuickStartGuide.md, after:

# Quick Start Guide - Azure Storage Cost Analyzer

## Fast Commands

### 1) Unattached Disks Only (fast)
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unattached-disks-only \
  --subscriptions "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>" \
  --days 30
```
Runs in ~20-30 seconds; skips snapshots for speed.

### 2) Full Unused Report (disks + snapshots)
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>" \
  --days 30
```
Use when snapshot counts are reasonable (<50); large snapshot sets will take longer.

### 3) Lists Only (no cost analysis)
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh list-disks "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh list-snapshots "<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>"
```

## Multi-Subscription Example
```bash
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --output-format json
```

## With Exclusions
```bash
# Exclude resources with future review dates AND specific resource groups
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --skip-tagged \
  --exclude-rgs "databricks-rg,temp-rg,velero-backup-rg"
```

Resources in excluded RGs younger than 60 days are excluded from alerts.
Resources older than 60 days are included as potential anomalies.

## Enable Cost Management Validation
```bash
# By default, Cost Management validation is skipped. Enable it when needed:
./azure-storage-cost-analyzer.sh unused-report \
  --subscriptions all \
  --days 30 \
  --validate-costs
```

## Notes
- Replace `<SUBSCRIPTION_ID>` with your target subscription or use `all` for all accessible subscriptions.
- For Zabbix sending, add `--zabbix-send --zabbix-server <host> --zabbix-host azure-storage-monitor`.
- Tag-based exclusion: set `Resource-Next-Review-Date=YYYY.MM.DD` on a disk/snapshot to suppress alerts until that date (use `--skip-tagged` flag).
- RG exclusion: use `--exclude-rgs "rg1,rg2"` to exclude ephemeral resource groups (default 60-day age threshold).
- Works on both Linux and macOS (bash 3.2+ compatible).
